### Sbt: The interactive tutorial**Covers Scala 2.11.8 and sbt 0.13.11**The two main reasons to learn sbt is (a) that it is interactive and can be used inside a REPL, and (b) that you can write Scala to define your build tasks. The first makes it easier to experiment with new settings and execute/inspect your tasks instantly; and the second gives you the power of a programming language to define and customize all your build, compile, test and deploy tasks. At the same time, sbt offers incremental compilation that can significantly improve the compile performance of Scala code. Let's start with an example project to explain the basics (assuming you have sbt installed). First create an empty directory, and then create the following files/directories: 1) A build file **build.sbt**```sbtname := "sbt-turorial"organization := "org.sbt-tutorial"version := "1.0"scalaVersion := "2.11.8"```2) A very basic Scala class with a runnable `main()`**src/main/scala/org/sbttutorial/main/Main.scala**```Scalapackage org.sbttutorial.mainobject Main extends App {  println("This is main()")}```3) Optionally if you want to specify the exact version of sbt**project/build.properties**```sbtsbt.version = 0.13.11```This is it. Just these 2-3 simple files make for a fully functional sbt project with a lot offeatures to learn and experiment. First, type `sbt` from the root of your project (the folder that has `build.sbt`). This will get you to the interactive REPL of sbt. Compile the project```> compile```Run the project ```> run```Clean the compiled .class files generated by the compile task ```> clean```You now have a way to compile your project, execute any main() class you have and clean your project. #### Tasks and Settings These are two of the most fundamental concepts in sbt. Understanding them it's very important.  You can think of sbt as a large collection of Key-Value pairs. Keys can be either tasks or settings. **Task:** A task is similar to a function in Scala. Like functions, tasks have return values and  every time you call a task some piece of code will be executed. Their main difference with functions is that tasks don't take arguments. (Sbt has a different kind of task called [InputTask](http://www.scala-sbt.org/0.13/docs/Input-Tasks.html) that takes arguments, but we will focus on regular tasks in this tutorial.) Tasks can depend on other tasks or settings (so task and setting form a DAG of inter-dependencies). From what we have used so far `compile, run, clean` are example of tasks.  **Settings**: Settings are like tasks in that they don't take arguments and they have a return value. Unlike tasks that are similar to functions, settings are similar to `lazy vals` in Scala. The code in a setting will be executed just once and the return value will be returned the same every time the setting is referenced. The `name` of a project is an example of a setting. **Unlike tasks that may depend on other tasks and settings, settings can only depend on other settings.**Without getting into too many details, we are going to cover some examples of creating custom settings and tasks:**Example of a Setting**Add the following in you `build.sbt` file:```SBTlazy val confFileName = settingKey[java.io.File]("Path to configuration settings")confFileName := baseDirectory.value / "conf" / "gen_file.txt"```In this example, the `confFileName` setting depends on the `baseDirectory` setting. To execute a task or get the value of a setting we use the `.value` method. Every setting has (i) a name (so you can reference it) (ii) a short description and (iii) a return type (in the example the type is `java.io.File`).To get the value of the setting from the REPL simply type:```> confFileName```**Example of a Task**```SBTlazy val genConfFile = taskKey[Unit]("Creates a dummy configuration file")genConfFile := {  val time: String = new java.util.Date().toString  println(time)  IO.write(confFileName.value, s"time=$time")}```This example demonstrates one of the main benefits of sbt: you can use Scala to define your settings and tasks! `IO.write` is a convenient function offered by sbt to wrap Java's BufferedWriter. There is nothing preventing you from using any Java or Scala IO libraries to achieve this.  Again, to execute a task or get the value of a setting we use the `.value` method.Finally, note that our example task depends on the `genConfFile` setting we defined. To execute the task from from the REPL simply type:```> genConfFile```**Example of modifying an existing Setting (or Task)**Our `genConfFile` task creates a new file every time it is called. It would be nice if sbt deleted that configuration file when we call `clean`. Here is how to add to an existing setting:```SBTcleanFiles := confFileName.value +: cleanFiles.value```Now, when we call `clean` sbt will also delete the configuration file we generated. sbt has a lot of default settings and tasks. It is a good investment of your time to learn as many as possible. Many of these settings and tasks are defined in [sbt.Keys](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/blob/0.13/main/src/main/scala/sbt/Keys.scala). Here is the content of out build.sbt file after the above additions:```sbtname := "sbt-tutorial"version := "1.0"scalaVersion := "2.11.8"organization := "org.sbt-tutorial"lazy val confFileName = settingKey[java.io.File]("Path to configuration settings")confFileName := baseDirectory.value / "conf" / "gen_file.txt"lazy val genConfFile = taskKey[Unit]("Creates a dummy configuration file")genConfFile := {  val time: String = new java.util.Date().toString  println(time)  IO.write(confFileName.value, s"time=$time")}cleanFiles := confFileName.value +: cleanFiles.value```### Interactive modeThe interactive feature of sbt is one the main things that make it great. We are goingto spend some time to demonstrate how to effectively utilize this feature. Type `sbt` to get started**show**The show command will execute and print the return value of a task or setting in sbt. ``` sbt> show name[info] sbt-tutorial> show version[info] 1.0> show organization[info] org.sbt-tutorial> show scalaVersion[info] 2.11.8> show baseDirectory[info] /Users/xyz/sbt-turorial> show sources[info] ArrayBuffer(/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/src/main/scala/org/sbttutorial/main/Main.scala)[success] Total time: 0 s, completed Aug 14, 2016 2:37:05 PM> show confFileName[info] /Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/conf/gen_file.txt``` ``` sbt> clean[success] Total time: 0 s, completed Aug 14, 2016 2:22:54 PM> show compile[info] Updating {file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/}sbt-turorial...[info] Resolving jline#jline;2.12.1 ...[info] Done updating.[info] Compiling 1 Scala source to /Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/target/scala-2.11/classes...[info] Analysis: 1 Scala source, 3 classes, 2 binary dependencies[success] Total time: 1 s, completed Aug 14, 2016 2:22:57 PM```**inspect**Gives you a detailed description of a task or setting. Inspect is great for looking up commands and understanding the internals of sbt.Here we use inspect to learn about the *name* setting we set in our `build.sbt` file.  ``` > inspect name 1.  [info] Setting: java.lang.String = sbt-tutorial 2.  [info] Description: 3.  [info] 	Project name. 4.  [info] Provided by: 5.  [info] 	{file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/}sbt-turorial/*:name 6.  [info] Defined at: 7.  [info] 	/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/build.sbt:1 8.  [info] Reverse dependencies: 9.  [info] 	*:projectInfo 10. [info] 	*:onLoadMessage 11. [info] 	*:description 12. [info] 	*:normalizedName 13. [info] Delegates: 14. [info] 	*:name 15. [info] 	{.}/*:name 16. [info] 	*/*:name ```Line 1 says that this a Setting with a return type being String and the return value being "sbt-tutorial".Lines 2-3 give the description of the setting (we will talk more about defining settings later). Similarly, lines 4-5 we will talk more later. We can see in Line 7 that this setting is defined in the first line of out build.sbt file. Lines 8-12 show which other settings/tasks depend on this setting (that is, they use this setting internally). Lines 13-16 we will cover later in more detail. ```> inspect sources1.  [info] Task: scala.collection.Seq[java.io.File]2.  [info] Description:3.  [info] 	All sources, both managed and unmanaged.4.  [info] Provided by:6.  [info] 	{file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/}sbt-turorial/compile:sources6.  [info] Defined at:7.  [info] 	(sbt.Defaults) Defaults.scala:1918.  [info] Dependencies:9.  [info] 	compile:unmanagedSources10. [info] 	compile:managedSources11. [info] Delegates:12. [info] 	compile:sources13. [info] 	*:sources14. [info] 	{.}/compile:sources15. [info] 	{.}/*:sources16. [info] 	*/compile:sources17. [info] 	*/*:sources18. [info] Related:19. [info] 	test:sources```Line 1 says that this is a Task that returns a `Seq[java.io.File]`. Line 3 shows the description of the task. We now see in line 8-10 that this task depends on two other tasks/settings. So when we execute `sources` it will first run `unmanagedSources` and  `managedSources`. Finally, lines 18-19 give a list of similar tasks/settings (have same name) that are defined in other scopes (namespaces). We will discuss more about namespaces later.Finally, here is the inspect on the custom task (genConfFile) we created before:```> inspect genConfFile[info] Task: Unit[info] Description:[info] 	Creates a dummy configuration file[info] Provided by:[info] 	{file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/}sbt-turorial/*:genConfFile[info] Defined at:[info] 	/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/build.sbt:16[info] Dependencies:[info] 	*:confFileName[info] Delegates:[info] 	*:genConfFile[info] 	{.}/*:genConfFile[info] 	*/*:genConfFile````Unit` here means that our task does not have a return value. **set**This is a great tool when you experiment with different settings in a project. This command allows you tochange the value of a setting or a task without having to modify any code. The changes are ephemeral and remain active only during the current sbt REPL session. ```> set name := "new-name"[info] Defining *:name[info] The new value will be used by *:description, *:normalizedName and 5 others.[info] 	Run `last` for details.[info] Reapplying settings...[info] Set current project to new-name (in build file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/)> show name[info] new-name```By default, sbt will run tasks in parallel (in the example below ignore the `::` notation for now). It essentially saysgive me the value of key `parallelExecution` used by task `test`.  ```> show test::parallelExecution[info] true> set parallelExecution in test := false[info] Defining *:test::parallelExecution[info] The new value will be used by test:test::testExecution[info] Reapplying settings...[info] Set current project to new-name (in build file:/Users/xyz/sbt-turorial/)> show test::parallelExecution[info] false```This is really powerful. We can go and change the individual keys used by different tasks and then execute themin the REPL to see the effect of our changes. To better understand task and setting in sbt we are going to take a look on how namespaces and scoping works. ### NamespacesAn important concept in sbt is how keys (settings, tasks, etc.) are managed into namespaces. sbt has three scope axis (think of it as a 3D coordinate system) for all its variables (keys): Project, Configuration, and Task. Project scope will make sense when we talk about multi-project builds, but for now, let's focus on the latter two, Configuration and Task. You might have already noticed that some tasks, such as `compile`, can refer to different things depending on their context. For example, you might want to compile your test code, or compile everything but your test code. How does sbt knows what to do when you just say `compile`? The answer is that sbt does that by namespacing the compile task (and every other key) into different configurations. By default there are three main configurations: Compile, Test, and Runtime. Compile groups together everything that has to do with managing your production code (the code located under `src/main`). For example, if you type `compile:compile` sbt will execute the compile task in the Compile configuration and compile just your production code (not your tests). Similarly, the Test configuration is responsible for all your test code (the code located under `src/test`). If you type `test:compile` it will run the compile task under the Test configuration. For the compile task,  `runtime:compile` is delicated to `compile:compile`, so nothing different happens in this case. You can see thisby yourself by inspecting the `runtime:compile` task and look under *Provided by*.```> inspect runtime:compile[info] Task: sbt.inc.Analysis[info] Description:[info] 	Compiles sources.[info] Provided by:[info] 	{file:/Users/xyz/sbt-tutorial/root-only/}root-only/compile:compile[info] Defined at:[info] 	(sbt.Defaults) Defaults.scala:271...```Here are some examples of Coniguration/Task keys:```> show runtime:sources[info] ArrayBuffer(/Users/xyz/sbt-tutorial/root-only/src/main/scala/org/sbttutorial/main/Main.scala)[success] Total time: 0 s, completed Aug 16, 2016 9:36:55 PM> show compile:sources[info] ArrayBuffer(/Users/xyz/sbt-tutorial/root-only/src/main/scala/org/sbttutorial/main/Main.scala)[success] Total time: 0 s, completed Aug 16, 2016 9:37:02 PM> show test:sources[info] ArrayBuffer()```Runtime and Compile have the same sources, whereas for Test we don't have any test classes, so the `sources` returns empty. In the example below we tell sbt to create a new JVM when we execute `run`, butuse the same JVM as sbt when we execute tests.  ```> set fork in Compile := true[info] Defining compile:fork[info] The new value will be used by compile:run::runner> set fork in Test := false[info] Defining test:fork[info] The new value will be used by test:run::runner, test:testGrouping```The last example shows that `test:fork` is used by `test:run::runner` and `test:testGrouping`. What if we wanted to fork a new JVM each time we execute `test:run` but not every time we run our tests? sbt allows us to focus into the Configuration and the Task:``` set fork in testGrouping in (Test, run) := false > show test:testGrouping::fork[info] false...set fork in runner in (Test, run) := true> show test:runner::fork[info] true...> show test:run::fork[info] true> show test:fork[info] false```We have exactly what we wanted. We create a new JVM when we execute `test:run` (this will execute a Main function defined inside our test classes) but wedon't fork a JVM when we simple run our tests `test:test`.You can see how powerful this is. We can manipulate different tasks by changing the values of the tasks or settings that it depends upon. The interactive shell willbe user best friend while trying to figure these out.  Alternatively, you can think of it as 3-tired namespaces.**1) Project, 2) Configuration, and 3) Task**From sbt interactive: ```<project-id>/config:intask::key```So you can say execute from project X (D-1) and configuration Compile (D-2) the run task (D-3). This will execute the main function found in the compile (under main/src folder) code of project X.     > projectX/compile:runSimilarly you can say execute run in the Test configuration of project X. This will now execute the main method (say you have one defined) that is under the test/src folder.     > projectX/test:run Now, tasks also have keys (internal configuration variables). For example:     > show projectX/compile:compile::sourcesThis will show the source files used by the compile task of Project-X's Compile configuration (when you compile just your code, not the tests).      > show projectX/test:compile::sources This will show the source files used by the compile task of Project-X's Test configuration (when you compile just your test files).#### Naming in SBT DSLsbt has different convention for naming tasks and scopes while you are writing in its DSL (inside .sbt files) and while executing tasks interactively via the sbt cli.     projectX/test:compile::sourcestranslates to     sources in (Test,compile) in projectX sbt has a lot of default scopes. For example, if you just enter sbt and type `compile`, it will actually execute the compile task under the Compile configuration of the Root project.  